The Project Gutenberg eBook of Universal peace--from a woman’s
standpoint, by Bertha von Süttner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Universal peace--from a woman’s standpoint

Author: Bertha von Süttner

Release Date: November 29, 2022 [eBook #69445]

Language: English

Produced by: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
             images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNIVERSAL PEACE--FROM A
WOMAN’S STANDPOINT ***





               UNIVERSAL PEACE—FROM A WOMAN’S STANDPOINT.


                    BY BARONESS BERTHA VON SÜTTNER.


I have been requested to write a contribution to these pages with the
above title. The subject of Universal Peace occupies my thoughts and
actions so completely, and the opportunity of addressing myself to a
circle of American readers is so welcome to me, that I was most willing
to comply with the wish of the Editor, although I should certainly have
chosen another title. For although it is self-evident that everything
that a woman writes must be written from a woman’s standpoint, it does
not agree with my principles to treat the problem of peace and war
exclusively, or even principally, in its relations to the feelings and
lives of women. Such relations certainly exist, and it will be of great
service to the progress of the peace movement if women, as such, will
oppose the institution hateful to mothers, and if women’s associations
(as daily occurs more often) will place the questions of peace and
arbitration on the order of the day at their meetings. But I believe
that more and more women, who reflect upon this important subject, will
leave the specifically feminine standpoint, to judge of this, so
eminently the universal concern of humanity, from a more general point
of view. It is only too natural that women should hate war, which robs
them of the support and the joys of their existence, and for that very
reason until to-day this hatred has done nothing towards the struggle
against war; on the contrary, only such women as could triumph over
their natural feelings of abhorrence, who, putting aside their own
grief, could incite to war, or even themselves perform warlike deeds,
only such women were brought into prominence by history; only these were
praised, because, overcoming their egoism, they had performed their duty
by performing brave deeds of sacrifice.

Women who cry, “War must cease because _we_ suffer from it, because _we_
may lose our dearest by it,” these, so long as war was looked upon as
natural and serviceable to the fatherland, certainly stood morally lower
than those who said: “What matters our misery, the common weal comes
first;” or those who bade their sons: “Return home victorious or dead.”

Any opposition arising from particular interests, whether it be the
interest of rank, class or sex, is deficient in ethical causes, and has
therefore also no ethical efficacy. The great influence that women are
beginning to exert to-day on questions of social progress, arises from
the fact that they have stepped out from their limited sphere of sex,
and have learned to judge these questions in their importance to
universal humanity. The woman who was capable of becoming an enthusiast
for war and joyfully sacrificing to it the supporter of her home and her
beloved sons, certainly stood higher than she who was wanting in such
powers of sacrifice; but on a far higher level stands the woman who
opposes war, not because it threatens _her_ home, but because she has
comprehended that it is an evil for the whole human race. Not because
they are daughters, wives, and mothers, do modern women wish to
undermine the institution called war, but they do it because they are
the rational moiety of a humanity that is becoming rational, and
comprehend that war represents a check to the development of culture,
and that from every standpoint—the moral and the economical, the
religious and the philosophical—it is harmful and to be condemned. The
New Woman alone will work successfully for the abolition of war. The
woman of yesterday, in spite of isolated complaints and warnings, did
the contrary: she incited silently or aloud to war—silently, by the
admiration which she cherished for heroism, and the pleasure which she
found in uniforms; aloud, by direct encouragement to fight.

The following episode has been related to me. It was before the Polish
insurrection, in the year 1863. In the house of an aristocratic lady the
_élite_ of Warsaw society were invited to dinner. After the meal, in the
smoking-room, the gentlemen were talking over the political situation.
The leaders of the subsequent insurrection were among those present. The
question was seriously discussed, whether it was possible to enter upon
a movement of insurrection with any prospect of success. The conclusion
was arrived at that under the existing circumstances such a movement
would be hopeless, and would only result in bloody massacre and
increased severity instead of deliverance, all agreeing that the plans
for a rising must be given up, at least for the moment. Nothing was to
be said to the ladies of this resolve on returning to the drawing-room,
for it would certainly incur their disapproval. One of the gentlemen,
however, was faithless to this resolution. He let the secret out. “What!
not possible!” cried the women in chorus. “That can only be a jest—no
Pole is capable of such cowardice! Who could propose anything so
disgraceful?” “Of course it was only a jest,” agreed the others, who
would have found the contempt of the women intolerable, and on the
following day the revolution, which resulted so unfortunately for
Poland, was set in motion by the same men who had resolved among
themselves not to attempt a rising, but who could not endure to
displease their wives.

One may presuppose that among the many motives which in the future will
work against militarism and war, the following powerful motive will be
found: the change in women’s favor. When once a higher reward of love is
granted to men for the heroic deeds of peace than for those of war, when
they know that they will only earn the admiration of the best women by
working for the new ideals of justice; and, on the contrary, will arouse
the abhorrence of noble women by supporting the system of force, then
one of the strongest motives which now drive young men into the
profession of arms will be overcome. The true and most important
connection between the woman’s question and the peace question is this:
the realization of the ideals of peace presupposes that the whole of
humanity should rise to a higher level than that upon which it now
stands in an overwhelming majority. In order that the element of force
and oppression, which governs the history of society in the past and in
the present, should yield to the element of right and freedom, a higher
type of man must be evolved. We are now witnessing this evolution. It
is, however, not apparent only in one sphere, but in many at the same
time, and especially strongly in the sphere of the women’s movement. To
the attainment of the ideal towards which modern endeavors are moving,
the unimpeded development is necessary of all mental germs in the whole
human race. None of the gifts shared by all may be suppressed by reason
of supposed unsuitability to the race, or class, or even sex; and the
virtues, the larger diffusion of which is to characterize the new type,
must be no longer divided into two halves; gentleness and moderation on
the feminine, courage and intellectual power on the masculine, side.

No; every person will have to exhibit these virtues, no matter to which
sex one may belong. Just as at the present day there are many common
qualities, without which neither woman nor man can lay claim to esteem,
such as honesty, cleanliness, diligence, love of truth, sense of duty,
in the same manner does the new ideal of perfection exact all human
virtues from all human beings at the same time. With the removal of
other privileges those of crime must also cease, and man shall no longer
pride himself on his excesses. Courage, that model virtue, first of the
lion, then of the savage, then of the hero, lastly of the soldier always
ready for battle, must lose its halo, and must not be practised only by
men to the point of contempt of life, but will be required in hours of
danger, in life’s difficult situations in a like measure from the
perfectly human woman. The human race will not be left alone to the care
of woman, but every perfect human being must disdain to be a slave to
the pleasure of the senses without love or in treacherous disloyalty.
Thus it will happen by the falling of the fetters which one sex has
borne so long, that not it alone, but also the other will rise to a
higher human dignity. Exactly the contrary will take place of what is
dreaded by the opponents of the emancipation of women: the woman will
not assume gross masculine defects, the man will not sink into womanish
effeminacy, but both united, among them the best, the strongest, and the
most intelligent, will form models of a nobler race.

It is unimaginable that a more highly developed cultured humanity, in
which both sexes have equal rights in the decisions of society, should
uphold the institutions of war. A certain amount of compassion, of
sensitive abhorrence of all that is hard and cruel, in a word—of noble
humanity, must exist in the cultured community. Men console themselves
with the thought that these qualities, so necessary to the existence and
dignity of society, are furnished by the feminine sex, and maintain
their right to hardness and roughness, a right which is most freely
active in war. But when the woman rises to an equal level, must she also
become a soldier, and shall she lay aside those virtues which are not
compatible with the profession of arms? Shall all gentleness vanish out
of the world? That is impossible. Therefore the woman must renounce
equal rights. This she will never do; it is much simpler for the man to
renounce the profession of arms.

The complete hideousness of unrestrained gross conduct, which passes as
permissible and occasionally as quite delightful in the masculine sex,
such as drinking, brawling and excess—the complete hideousness of this
conduct is plainly visible when one imagines a woman given to such
behavior. On the other hand, many weaknesses of character are counted as
contemptible in men, and excusable, if not charming, in women—as
cowardice, weakness of will, and thoughtlessness. Now, when woman lays
aside these “lovely” faults, when she shows energy and self-confidence,
some certainly praise her for her _masculine_ character, but others at
once give utterance to the fear that, with the laying aside of the
feminine defects, the feminine virtues will also fall into abeyance. But
that is not the case: both sexes must lay aside those faults which
disgrace, and practise those virtues which ennoble, humanity.

And now, after protesting against my views being supposed to arise from
a specifically feminine standpoint, I will say what I think about
universal peace; but first, I should like to give a picture of universal
war, as I see it[1] from the war of the future, so long prophesied and
so splendidly prepared.

Footnote 1:

  See my “_Maschinenzeitalter_.” III. _Auflage. Pierson’s Verlag._

A war in which all the great military States of Europe took part would
surpass all horrors that have hitherto taken place, in the same degree
as the present weapons of destruction and those still to be invented
surpass the club with which Cain may have slain his brother. In such a
war an amount of murder and destruction and savagery would be contained,
such as was not in a hundred battles of ancient times. The progress that
has been made has not only increased the power of destruction a
thousandfold, but also that which is to be destroyed has become a
thousand times more valuable, and therefore the injury would be
proportionately greater.

The accelerated, incalculable improvement and increase, the technical
development that has grown to colossal dimensions, which leads to such
fabulous results when directed to the increase of property and
happiness, to what equally gigantic results of misery must these not
lead, when applied to the principle of the _destruction_ of property,
happiness, and life: millions of combatants rush upon one another, and
the fighting begins at ever greater distances. Instead of the spear,
that only flew a short distance, instead of the later bullet that hit
the enemy at a few hundred paces, the death-bringing bombs now whistle
through space at a distance of miles; long before the two combatants can
see each other the vanguard covers the field. But when and how will the
decision take place? “Until one or the other side is so weakened that it
gives up the fight.” That was in former times the answer to this
question. Now both sides rage with equal force. The weakening keeps
equal pace. Hundreds of thousands are fallen, but new hundreds of
thousands advance, and the decision is not a step nearer. A vanquished,
flying army? That exists no more, for no longer are mere armies sent
forth, but whole nations. They fight with each other for the sake of a
strip of land; but meanwhile the entire land is devastated, depopulated
and ravaged on either side. All crops are trodden under foot, all labor
suspended, all hearths desolated; one cry of pain from frontier to
frontier, and still no decision. Every village a heap of ashes, every
field a burial ground, and yet the fight still rages; under the waves of
the sea shoot the torpedo boats, to sink mighty steamships; in the
clouds rise armed and manned air-balloons against another aëronautic
force, and from the height of a thousand feet mutilated warriors shower
down in bleeding fragments; mines are sprung and bridges are hurled into
the waves with their loads of men, horses and carriages; powder
magazines fly into the air; long lines of trains run off the rails;
hospitals blaze; and still it is not decided. Army, reserve, militia—the
aged, children, women—one after the other is slaughtered; what still
lives becomes the prey of famine, of the infallible pestilence, and the
war is over. But it is not decided. The tremendous magnitude of the
impending war—a magnitude which may be determined with mathematical
certainty by reason of the present ever-increasing number of combatants
and technique of weapons, might instil a certain admiration and
satisfaction, if the love of and rage for fighting had increased in
proportion to its means; if the value of human life had sunk in the
esteem of the individual in the same degree as in the calculations of
material by the administrators of armies; if finally the _gain_ of war
had increased as much as the inevitable losses. But the reverse of all
this is the case. Hatred and love of fighting give place to
civilization, growing gentler and constantly spreading; the value of
life rises with the embellishments and alleviations afforded by daily
advancing progress; and lastly, as regards the advantages of the final
victory, a strip of land or a heap of fortress stones, or the absolutely
illusory “Fame”—these things, powerless to enrich or to make happy, sink
in an ever greater disparity to those sacrifices, increasing to the
uttermost, which they render necessary.

So much for the approaching (or, it is to be hoped, not approaching)
war. As regards universal peace, which may now not be so remote—for at
the present time a conference is assembled in this name, called together
by the most powerful military ruler in the world—people are by no means
clear as to its foundations and aims. Most persons believe that members
of Peace Societies imagine under the name of universal peace a condition
of general harmony, a world without fighting or divisions, with
undisputed frontiers settled for all time, and inhabited by angelic
beings, overflowing with gentleness and love. It is an old custom of the
enemies of any movement to represent it in a false light, to attribute
absurdities to it which it has never asserted, and then to attack them
with cheap sarcasm and obvious refutations. So also here. The friends of
peace do not desire to found their kingdom on impossibilities, nor on
conditions that might perhaps prevail thousands of years hence, but on
the living present and living humanity. The avoidance of all disputes is
not demanded—for that is impossible—but that the disputes should be
settled henceforward by arbitration instead of by force, as was hitherto
the case. This level of culture has already been attained by the
individuals of organized states: that it should be attained also by the
states themselves in their relations to each other, is the aim and
object of the whole peace movement. Thereby one right would certainly be
lost—a right which, although it bears the proud name of sovereignty, is
in truth a great wrong; the right of one state to attack another. But if
ten persons agree among themselves to desist from mutual attack, each
exchanges one-tenth of his lost chance of plunder for nine-tenths of
assured safety. Immutability of existing frontiers and social
arrangements is demanded as little as the avoidance of disputes. For
this, too, would be contrary to nature. Obstinacy, bearing the proud
title of Conservatism, which opposes all natural alterations and
displacements, is itself the cause of all forcible revolt. Just as in
private life, the individual’s possessions are protected from robbery by
a civilized commonwealth, but the possessor is not guaranteed for all
time, and the poor are not prevented from gaining possessions. Rich and
poor families grow or die out, increase or decrease in fortune; new
groups are formed, drawn together by natural selection; a growing
population must overflow the frontiers; forms of state belonging to a
lower level of culture must be supplanted by the civilization of those
culturally superior. _Elasticity_ is the only quality which ensures
peaceful duration or painless and imperceptible transition from one form
to another. The world should remember this, now that it has learned the
law of evolution, and knows that all life and development is the work of
adaptation.

But to contemplate peace and war from a general standpoint is what
philosophers and politicians have done from the earliest times. To work
out plans and propositions, by which the ruling state of war may be
replaced by the establishment of international justice, is a labor which
has been carried on systematically for the last ten years by the various
groups of the League of Peace, and the inter-parliamentary union. An
entire literature already exists on this subject, and by consulting Dr.
Evan Darby’s “International Tribunal”[2] and Dr. Benjamin Trueblood’s
lately published work, “The Federation of the World,”[3] a complete
knowledge of the ideal and practical aims may be gained, as also of the
results already acquired.

Footnote 2:

  London Peace Society, 47 New Broad Street.

Footnote 3:

  Boston and New York, Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1899.

But now, at the present moment, when the work of peace is placed in the
hands of an inter-governmental conference at the Hague, furnished with
powers to realize the resolutions passed, it is no longer fitting to
draw up theories of the abstract idea of universal peace: now everyone
sympathizing with the great cause, and especially such as are in
immediate proximity to the conference, are compelled to concentrate all
their interest upon it. And, therefore, I will close these lines with a
few thoughts, which, quite apart from the “woman’s standpoint,” might
bear the title: “Universal Peace and the Conference at the Hague.”

It appears to me that in the criticism and discussion of this unique
phenomenon, this unprecedented historical event, the importance of the
fact that such a Conference is sitting is too much forgotten. One either
loses oneself in the question: “What will be discussed?” and subjects
every item of the programme to a minute technical criticism, or one
enquires: “What will be the result?” and indulges in more or less
hopeful, or more or less sceptical, conjectures and prophecies. One
forgets to contemplate the overwhelming fact that such a Conference has
been called together by an autocrat in our ultra-military times, and in
which every State takes part.

Apart from all that will be achieved by speeches, propositions and
resolutions, the significance and the effect of the event itself must be
of the greatest influence, and the first official Peace Conference
appears like a miracle in the history of the world.

Among the many arguments brought against peace movements on the part of
sceptics, the most powerful used to be: “What is the use of private
exertions?” Rulers will never agree to restrict militarism, which is the
support of the throne, or to abolish war, which is the _raison d’être_
of militarism. Autocratic Russia itself presented the most serious
menace of war. “Suppose you attempt,” was the scornful remark, “to get
the Tsar upon the list of your societies; then you might speak!” Now,
the Tsar stands at the head of all peace movements, but the opponents
set aside the circumstance that the most obvious of their ten ordinary
arguments has been refuted, and, undismayed, employ the nine remaining
ones against the Tsar himself.

People do not only forget to observe the magnitude of such an event as
the meeting of an inter-governmental Conference; they also forget, in
speaking of the subjects under discussion, to open their eyes to the
importance of them. They know what the point in question is, but they do
not realize it. Like a person ignorant of music before a symphony of
Beethoven, like a three-year-old child before a picture by Raphael, so
do people stand before the chronicle of the Conference. They hear and
see, but the awe of comprehension does not thrill through them.
“Universal Peace!” How few can comprehend the harmony and the glory that
lie in these words. How few reflect, while discussing the problems lying
before the Conference, _what_ is really at stake: the happiness or ruin
of themselves and their children! For, that the _régime_ of
international justice would shower an undreamed-of abundance of moral
and material benefits upon the civilized world, and on the other hand,
that continued military equipments and the eventual employment of the
increasingly deadly weapons of war _must_ lead to ruin and annihilation,
can be denied by none. Thus it is nothing less than our highest
happiness or deepest misery which is being discussed in the _Huis ten
Bosch_. But the world looks on as though it were a question of customs
duties or weights and measures; many boast of “being indifferent to the
matter.” They think thus to prove their superiority, and only show that
they do not understand. Not only without but within the Conference is
there an uncomprehending majority. Among the delegates, as well as among
the Governments that sent them, most are as indifferent, in some cases
as hostile, as unintelligent, generally speaking, as the ordinary public
towards the idea of universal peace. But that matters nothing: the fact
remains that an international parliament is now assembled in the name of
this idea; the spirit abiding in the idea, and inspiring the originator
as well as a number of the delegates, will exert its power upon the
indifferent, the hostile, and the uncomprehending, and will penetrate
the world.

The true significance of the Conference is contained in the following
words, addressed by the President, von Staal, to the delegates at the
opening of the first sitting:

  “To seek the most effective means of ensuring to all nations the
  benefits of a real and lasting peace, that is the chief aim of our
  deliberations according to the text of the circular of August 24.

  “The name ‘Peace Conference,’ which the instinct of the nations,
  anticipating the resolution of the Governments, has given to our
  Assembly, this name well describes the principal object of our labors;
  the Peace Conference must not be faithless to the mission laid upon
  it; it must bring forth a tangible result from these deliberations,
  which is awaited in confidence by all mankind.”

All mankind? Not yet. A great portion of it, that which still holds fast
to the thousand-year-old institution of war, be it through personal
interest or the power of imparted prejudice, hopes that the Conference
will produce no result which may endanger war; a still greater portion,
the dull masses, expect nothing at all. But those who really have
confidence in the progress of culture, who, in agreement with the
originator of the Conference and his faithful fellow-workers, are
convinced of the necessity of the present ruinous system giving place to
another, these latter will note these words of the President of the
Conference; and in case of disappointment, in case the Conference were
faithless to its mission, would raise the demand for fulfilment so
loudly and continuously that at length all mankind would be carried away
by it.

But such disappointment will not take place. That may be boldly said
beforehand. The proposals already put before the Assembly vouch for the
earnestness and sincerity of the work which has been begun. They are a
proof that the following sentence from Staal’s speech is no mere phrase,
but the expression of noble resolve:

  “Diplomacy, following a universal law, is no longer an art in which
  personal skill plays the principal part, but is striving to become a
  science, which must possess fixed rules for the settlement of
  international conflicts. That is to-day the ideal aim that it must
  bear in view, and great progress will indubitably be made, if
  diplomacy succeeds in laying down some of these rules at this
  Conference. We shall also particularly endeavor to codify the practice
  of arbitration and mediation. These ideas form, so to speak, the
  essence of our task, the chief aim of our exertions; ‘to prevent
  conflicts by peaceful means.’”

These words faithfully echo the instructions given by the Tsar to his
ambassador. And already much has been done in the specified direction.
It is clear that other powers had come to the Conference with plans
equally far-reaching if not more so, and the subject of an
“International Permanent Tribunal of Arbitration”—this wildest dream of
the Utopians—has already been discussed and even in many points
unanimously accepted.

The propositions offered by the representatives of Russia, England,
Italy and the United States are known through the newspapers. To the
opponents of the peace movement that have lately pointed out with
special satisfaction that America, that stronghold of efforts for peace,
has lately entered military channels, to these the plan sent by the
American Government must have caused remarkable stupefaction. With these
proposals, with this energetic and open participation in the work of
peace, the American will again fill that position in the history of
civilization with which the friends of peace in the whole world have
always credited him: the Pioneer of peace and freedom.

A tangible result will be produced by the Conference, something newly
created, constituted, permanent, that can be developed and expanded. And
besides this, a direct result, how many indirect ones? The whole world
must now take part in the question, and the various branches of the
social organism, the Church, Art, Literature, the Press, are drawn into
the service of propagandism. Gifted men like Stead and Bloch, now
resident at the Hague, have an opportunity of a field worthy of their
labors. Stead has prevailed upon a Dutch daily paper to publish an
article on “War against War,” which plays the same part towards the
Conference as the weekly paper for the English, “Crusade of Peace.”
Bloch is giving lectures, illustrated by views, offering a _resumé_ of
the great six-volume work in which, supported by dates and facts, he
proves that the war of the future is a technical impossibility, an
“Utopia.” Even if the general public has not comprehended the marvellous
significance of the meeting of the Conference, perhaps it will be
capable of perceiving the significance of positive results. Facts and
successes are always more powerful than the most glorious theories,
however irrefutable. And the positive results will be of various kinds.
One brings another with it. The question of neutralizing the States, the
question of the coalition of neutrals, and lastly the question of
disarmament, although the two former are not upon the programme, and the
latter seems to have been momentarily put aside—will come to the front.
Disarmament and a check to military equipment, these were the chief
motives of the Tsar’s manifesto. To avert the ruin and misfortune
brought upon nations by “armed Peace,” was mentioned as the object for
which remedies were to be found. When once these remedies—international
justice, etc.—have been found, the object can no longer be evaded. I
believe that the decision of the Conference upon the question of
disarmament will offer a startling resolution, or at least a declaration
of principle, which will be binding in the future. One need not fear to
be confounded when prophesying agreeable surprises.

Truly, I venture to assert with confidence, the progress from the first
of the past eight Peace Congresses in 1889 to the Hague Congress of 1899
has been far longer and more difficult than that leading from this
Conference to a complete attainment of its aims; _i. e._, to the
abolition on principle of the institution of war. In the midst of our
endeavors for universal peace the Tsar’s initiative fell like a
bombshell; but now, even were it in the near future, the inauguration of
lawfully guaranteed peace would appear to those qualified to judge no
longer as a surprise, but as a fulfilment.

                                                     BERTHA VON SÜTTNER.

The Hague, June, 1899.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected obvious typographical errors and variations in
      spelling.
 2. Retained archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNIVERSAL PEACE--FROM A
WOMAN’S STANDPOINT ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
